# Managing data updates on the Explore Local Statistics App (v2)

The raw data used in this project is maintained on the [Connected Open Government Statistics (COGS) github site](https://github.com/GSS-Cogs).

The [explore-local-statistics-data](https://github.com/ONSdigital/explore-local-statistics-data) repo is updated by the analysis and data teams on a frequent basis. For changes to this repository to be replicated in the Explore Local Statistics app, the following steps need to be undertaken.

## Step 1 - Know what changes to expect

The data team will let us know when there are data updates ready to be previewed, and will give an indication of what these changes entail (e.g. adding new years of data to an existing indicator, adding new indicator). They will indicate on which branch of their data repo the latest required updates are.

The data team may have mutliple update branches for different indicator updates. (Generally, the data team should combine updates onto a shared branch if they will be QAed by the same team and are likely to go live at the same time.) If there are multiple branches, the below process needs to be run for each branch.

## Step 2 - Create branch

Create a new branch from `develop`, following the naming convention: updates/dd-mmm/brief-description. This will often be the same as the corresponding branch on the data repo.

```
git checkout develop
git pull
git checkout -b updates/20-Apr/claimant-count-avg-house-price
```

## Step 3 - Run the ingest

### Define data repo

Edit the `scripts/config/data-repo-version.json` file to match the name of the data repo branch, including updating the notes.

### Run ingest

Use the npm command:

`npm run data:ingest`

This will run the scripts to download the data from the specified data repo branch, generate the csvw metadata json for each dataset, and run the pre-flight checks.

## Step 4 - Check the changes

Open the output file `data-update-changelog.txt` generated by the previous command. This should give a summary of the changes between the incoming raw data and existing data on the app. It is important to check that these match the expected changes.

### Edit the manifest

If new indicators have been added, the changelog will highlight these in outputs 1. (new dataset) or 2. (new indictor), and prompt you to add information to the manifest: `scripts/config/manifest_metadata.csv`.

In the manifest file, add a new line for each new indicator. The order of the manifest dictates the taxonomy, so add the new line according to where the indicator should appear on the `/indicators` page.

| Column     | Definition                                                                                                                                              |
| ---------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `slug`     | This forms the url for the indicator page. Create a unique, [sensible slug](#examples-for-making-good-slugs), consistent with those of other indicators |
| `topic`    | Taxonomy topic                                                                                                                                          |
| `subTopic` | Taxonomy subtopic                                                                                                                                       |
| `dataset`  | Should match csvw-metadata.json > metadata > indicators > dataset                                                                                       |
| `code`     | Should match csvw-metadata.json > metadata > indicators > code                                                                                          |
| `include`  | Boolean (`true`/`false`) - whether the indicator should be included in the build.                                                                       |

## Step 5 - Run the build

Use the npm command:

`npm run data:build`

This will run the scripts to generate the data, the download spreadsheets and the sitemap. The data generation script will throw an informative error if it detects an indicator not present in the manifest.

Use `npm run dev` to view a preview of the app and check for the expected changes.

## Step 6 - Publish changes

### Generate preview link

Commit and push the changes to generate a preview link, findable on the [deployments](https://github.com/ONSdigital/explore-local-statistics-app/deployments) page. Send this to the data team to QA.

### Go live

Once the changes are approved, the data team will merge all update branches ready to go live into the `main` branch on their repo.

When this has happened, update from `develop` if there have been changes since making the update branch, then edit the `scripts/config/data-repo-version.json` file again - this time to pull in from data `main`. Rerun data:ingest and data:build and push the changes. This ensures that the go-live branch of the app is always up-to-date with the main branch of the data repo.

Open a pull request to merge the app update branch into `develop`. Use the #els-developers slack channel to notify others to approve the PR. Once approved and ready to go live, open a PR to merge `main <-- develop`. Once approved and merged, notify the team that the app is ready to be pushed to live.

## Notes

### Examples for making good slugs:

| Bad                                                                                            | Better                                          |
| ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------- |
| `public-funded-gross-regional-capital-and-non-capital-expenditure-on-research-and-development` | `expenditure-research-and-development-public`   |
| `business-expenditure-on-research-and-development`                                             | `expenditure-research-and-development-business` |
| `scotland-unecessarily-long-and-verbose-indicator-name`                                        | `indicator-succinct-scotland`                   |
| `wales-unecessarily-long-and-verbose-indicator-name`                                           | `indicator-succinct-wales`                      |
